As a French citizen, it is important for me
to speak to my friends and comrades, who are German for the most part today.
Our two peoples,
have a specific responsibility in the history of Europe
and especially
because of the economic power of both our nations
we have no right to hide
behind abstractions
and offload our specific responsibility onto other nations.
Many observations were made regarding the critics
and the solutions to the current crisis.
I have no intention to make some more.
The first question I ask myself,
as a Frenchman and as an internationalist,
is how to change, in my own country,
the current conditions of Europe
and i think it should be the task of all of us, in our respective countries.
It is an abstraction to believe that there will be
a global movement in all 28 countries
which would relieve us from the specific responsibility of being game-changers in our respective countries.
If in a few months
destiny,
and voters,
want me to lead my country,
what could I do?
Well, the first challenge I will face
will be Germany,
led by Mrs Merkel
who imposed on all Europe
with the collusion of all the conservative governments, on the one hand,
and on the other hand, the active involvement
of all the social-democrats of Europe
to coalition governments that have enforced the policy wished
by Mrs Merkel's governement. This policy mainly consists in protecting the interests of the German financial capital
because of the specific conditions of Germany
and of the core of Mrs Merkel's political base,
whose funded pension system
and so requires a strong euro
in order to make their life conditions cheap
as well as low wages
in order to yield high dividends
that guarantee funded pensions.
The great difficulty that we face
comes from the implementation of this policy
but also
from the fact that French leaders have been incredibly cowardly!
They betrayed the people's decision
of rejecting
the Constitutional Treaty project,
by saying
to Mrs Merkel
that they agreed to sign the European treaties.
They were coward because the French people had voted
for candidates who said they would renegociate the treaty
that was being written,
but no sooner were they elected that they signed it.
Therefore, I must tell you that although
we blame it on Mrs Merkel, we do not forget that the reason why
she could implement this policy was that Sarkozy and Hollande  said "Yes Madam, you're right."
and betrayed the people who had voted against it.
Do you see how difficult this is?
And because of successive capitulations,
the balance of power changed.
Mrs Merkel and Mr Schäuble's government
feels powerful enough to intolerably ill-treat
Greece,
Cyprus,
Portugal,
Spain and Italy.
Our nations are called
"Club Med" countries,
but let us remind you that "Club Med" countries are the second, third et fourth economic powers of the continent!
We are in a very dangerous situation,
which is why I am telling you about it so passionately and seriously.
Besides war instincts are strong anew.
Irresponsible people
in Eastern Europe want to bring about a shock with Russia at all costs!
NATO already set its military bases and its missiles there!
It is our duty to say
that the Russians are not our enemies!
They are our partners and we don't want to go to war with them!
We don't want to!
(applauds)
I should avoid
dealing with too many issues, but I want to show what these issues have in common.
Their common point is this policy which encourages peoples to fight one another.
The mechanism of Europe today is a mechanism of confrontation within and between nations!
The European Union of European treaties, of the Lisbon Treaty
and of the last treaty cannot produce anything but misery and war!
Therefore, the watchword that should
unite us altogether should be that we withdraw from the European treaties.
Not Europe, but the European treaties!
This is why I developed the idea
that we the French should have a plan A:
we should tell our partners that we must withdraw from the treaties,
or that we at least should stop obeying the treaties that allow the employment of posted workers,
which amounts to relocating labor force
in each factory.
We will stop enforcing the treaties that forbid us to develop our public services!
We will stop enforcing the treaties that force us to implement absurd austerity measures,
because what is good for ageing Germany is not
good for France, the youngest country in Europe,
that needs roads, schools, hospitals, bridges,
and work for everyone!
We cannot sacrify our people, our existence as a nation,
in order to please an ideology!
And if our partners refuse the plan A,
if they refuse to listen to us,
then we will apply our plan B.
In short,
we will either change Europe,
or we will leave it!
And why would we leave it?
Because nothing is superior to the people's sovereignty in a democracy!
Nothing!
The French people's sovereignty is threatened by the governments
that henceforth think it is normal to commit acts of war against
Cyprus by cutting off its money supplies!
To commit acts of war against Greece by cutting off its money supplies and by humiliating it!
By making promises to Greece concerning its debt
without fulfilling these promises, in exchange for sacrifices that were already made!
This is the historical moment
you spoke of Sarah!
The threat does not come from us, who are called Eurosceptics...
We are not those who jeopardize the European ideal!
Those who jeopardize the European ideal are those who are making it collapse right before me!
We witnessed the violence against Greece that aimed at preventing
the soverignty of the Greek people to be respected.
And now comes the Brexit.
What is the next step?
What is the next step? Tell me!
You Germans saw the collapse of a system right under your nose,
so you know the collapse of the EU is possible.
As for us, I said that we propose a plan A and a plan B:
withdrawing from the European treaties together in order to build new policies.
But we also have a duty, and I will conclude on this point.
There is something that is more important than our nations,
more important than our peoples,
it is the environmental emergency!
The planet is burning!
We cannot just stand by and watch, and make speeches.
It is important that some governments break with
this productivist system that is directly linked and consubstantial to
nowadays capitalism,
in order to make the transition, not only of energy,
but also of production processes,
of exchange processes,
in order to change the way we consume that needs to undergo a cultural revolution
of our lifestyle and of our way of seeing life.
We therefore must question wealth accumulation.
What is the point of
wanting 2 billion when you already have one?
Of wanting 2 million when you already have?
What is the true richness of human beings if not the fact that they care about one another?
Or the love we share?
Or the tenderness we lavish on others? These are high-priority measures
in a left-wing program.
We now have to care about the human public interest.
What is it that binds us?
It is the human public interest.
This is what I wanted to say. I don't know if I will have many other occasions
to talk to you about these issues.
I want to express my immense gratitude
to Die Linke, and more particularly
to Oskar Lafontaine,
because he gave us the courage to break with the old system,
and if there is one thing I can teach you,
it is that we should break with this corrupt world!
We should break with it and find the courage in ourselves when we
left-wingers are in power to enforce left-wing policies!
Ok. So the first thing we ca say is that we have lot
to do together in the next two years.
I like to place political problems in their context.
In the next two years, there will be presidential elections in France
that will be decisive for Europe to a large extent.
The year after, there will be elections in Germany,
and of course, if Germany undergoes political changes,
we can say that the risks that a war bursts out
and that violence increases will be lessened.
The next two years are therefore crucial.
Our destiny is in our hands.
This is not an abstraction or a distant idea...
This is not a conference's topic...
We will campaign,
and what is the goal of an political campaign?
The goal of a campaign is to win the election
and to convince people.
To do so, we need each other.
I said there will be
elections in Germany
and France next year,
and this same year, there will also be the ratification process
of the TAFTA,
free trade agreement with the USA
and of the CETA
free trade agreement with Canada.
Therefore, in our respective countries,
we must be in the lead of the movement
that will allow our peoples to express
their sovereignty!
We can share a common claim.
In each country, our peoples should be able to have a say on the TAFTA and CETA agreements!
It seems to me that if we show that we are united, we will demonstrate that an alternative
to the scheme of things is possible.
It is a bit difficult to say all this since I am speaking from paradise.
You know that you're living in paradise, right?
In France, we are told that we should imitate the German model,
because everything is OK here. The proof is that you sell a lot of cars.
Well...
When I speak with my German friends, it does not seem to be enough to make them happy.
Bu that's what we are told in France!
And when we criticize this model we are immediately called germanophobes!
If I disagree with Mrs Merkel's policy, I am told that I want to make war on Germany!
No I don't. I even have a friend named Oskar Lafontaine
and we need to show that we are political friends.
You asked me a question. I need Oskar and other
comrades to come to France during the campaign,
so that you say "No, Germany is not a paradise!".
"This is a lie!"
We need you!
You then asked me what piece of advice I could give you. Well I don't know, if I knew
a miracle cure I would have already applied it to my own country
and tonight's conference would be unnecessary.
But there's something else that I'd like to say.
We should be able to embody the people's anger.
If
we are afraid of upsetting the fashionables,
if we are afraid of raising our voices because it is not polite,
if we are afraid of saying that the European treaties are absolutely
incompatible with the dignity of our peoples
because we are afraid of being considered Eurosceptics,
then we won't be able to convince anyone!
We must speak bluntly!
I don't know how to translate this in German.
Bluntly and straightforwardly!
Blunt as a blade!
We need to speak bluntly and straightforwardly, and we must embody the tribune function!
The people doubts
and is sometimes led to listen to
discourses on identity.
Well... This works very well in France!
They speak of identity, so...
Just ask yourselves the question: who are you?
You are not the same person your whole life. You are not the same person at every hour.
So imagine what it's like when 65 million people have to say who they are at the same time!
This is a completely crazy question
that has no reality!
People in our countries are and will be more and more of different cultures, and this is a good thing!
We should therefore understand the issue of identity as a trick of "important people".
A trick to substitute the issue of identity
for social and environmental issues.
But we won't be listened to if we are not
crystal clear, if we don't say things without beating about the bush!
We should put forward an idea of human civilization. Which is why
I like answering to a lettered man.
What prevails in social life is morals,
love, tenderness, looking after others,
and NOT selling big cars!
What prevails in society is the reason why we are together,
and I think that if we speak the language of the Enlightenment's humanism,
if we remind people that all human beings are fellow men
and that we will therefore all die in like manner...
If you Germans keeping doing coal surface mining,
if we the French keep on building nuclear power plants, not only in our country,
but also abroad, thinking it is safe until an accident occurs...
We are fellow human beings and we speak that language of sameness,
so as we said it in the case of Dracula,
if we turn the light of humanism,
Dracula vanishes into thin air!